ClozureCL 1.2
=============

Welcome to the first ClozureCL (aka OpenMCL) release in about 2.5 years!
(There have been a lot of 1.1-prerelease snapshots in that time frame,
and there's been a lot of development activity; hopefully, it'll be
a little easier for people who wish to use a relatively stable version
to do so and still make it easy for those who want to track the bleeding
edge of development to do so.)

[In the fall of 2007, Alice Hartley of Digitool announced that MCL (the
commercial product from which OpenMCL was derived) would be opensourced.
In order to reduce potential confusion between the new "open MCL" and
"OpenMCL" - and to coincidentally make the primary implementation package
and default installation directory name ("ccl") meaningful again - we
decided to rename OpenMCL to "Clozure CL" (or "CCL").  There are still
references to the old name in URLs, bits and pieces of the lisp itself,
mailing lists, and elsewhere.]

Documentation
-------------

Documentation is available online at: 

<http://ccl.clozure.com/ccl-documentation.html>

A recent version of the HTML documentation is also included in the
distribution, along with the DocBook source from which it's derived.
These release notes describe some important recent (for some value
of "recent") changes.

CVS out, SVN in:
---------------

Until the spring of 2007, ClozureCL used CVS for revision control;
tar archives for the 1.0 release and 1.1 snapshots contained CVS
metainformation, and it was generally possible to use "cvs update"
and related commands to update an installation to the latest version.

At that time, we switched to using the Subversion ("SVN") revision
control system, but continued to mirror the main line of development
in CVS (to the extent that this was possible, given some limitations
of CVS.)

This release is entirely SVN-based and makes use of Subversion features
that can't be supported in CVS. Subversion clients are widely available
for all platforms that ClozureCL runs on:

 - FreeBSD and Linux users will likely find that subversion packages
   are readily available through their distribution's package management
   systems.

 - 'svn' is preinstalled on OSX Leopard

 - OSX Tiger users can install Subversion via Fink or MacPorts, or
   look at <http://downloads.open.collab.net/binaries.html> for other
   options.

It should be possible to use GUI svn clients if you prefer.

Note that the tar archives that contain ClozureCL distributions
contain svn metainformation that assumes the use of a version 1.4 or
later svn client; the format of some of that metainformation isn't
understood by older clients.  If you have an older client (and can't
install something more up-to-date), you ignore the tarballs and just
check out the full CCL distribution (sources, binaries, interfaces
...) via svn.



